# TCS 2 Task Group meeting

## 6 October 2021, at 20:00 UTC, via Webex

**Present**: Stan Blum, Anne Fuchs, Jeff Gerbracht, Niels Klazenga, Johan
Liljeblad, Jonathan Rees, Peter Uetz, William Ulate, Cam Webb

**1. Way of work**

- We had a discussion about how to manage the terms and definitions.
- We will try out Steve Baskauf's standards documentation pipeline.
- One problem with using the GitHub issues as the "master" is that only the person who created the issue and the owner(s) of the repository can edit it.
- Niels is catching up with Steve Baskauf to talk about these issues.
- We will use coming meetings to move issues across project boards. Hopefully most of the definition and comments can be completed between meetings.
- GitHub has a new thing, Discussions, which we will use for more wide-ranging discussions that affect multiple terms, so that we can keep the Issues clean. Niels will start off the first ones. For discussions that are not, or only tangentially, related to TCS, the TNC repository should still be used.
- There is a 'Show and tell' type of Discussions, which could be used for examples.

**2. Milestones**

- Nobody had suggestions for milestones, so Niels will come up with some.
- For now we will just go through the classes in the order: TaxonConcept, TaxonRelationship, TaxonName, NomenclaturalType. Vocabularies will be discussed with the class the properties they apply to are in.

**3. Next meeting**

- We will have an IG meeting, which will be all about TCS 2, in the TDWG Work Sessions in November.
- Next meeting of the TCS 2 Task Group will be early December.
